
   OS)

   IX

   THAT EXILE IS NOT AN EVIL

   Hearing an exile lament because lie was living in banishment, Musonius
   consoled him in somewhat the following way. Why, he asked, should anyone
   who was not devoid of understanding be oppressed by exile? It does not in
   any way deprive us of water, earth, air, or the sun and the other planets,
   or indeed, even of the society of men, for everywhere and in every way
   there is opportunity for association with them. What if we are kept from a
   certain part of the earth and from association with certain men, what is
   so dreadful about that? Why, when we were at home, we did not enjoy the
   whole earth, nor did we have contact with all men; but even now in exile
   we may associate with our friends, that is to say the true ones and those
   deserving of the name, for they would never betray or abandon us; but if
   some prove to be sham and not true friends, we are better off separated
   from them than being with them. Tell me, is not the universe the common
   fatherland of all men, as Socrates held? Well, then, you must not consider
   it really being banished from your fatherland if you go from where you
   were born and reared, but only being exiled from a certain city, that is
   if you claim to be a reasonable person. For such a man does not value or
   despise any place as the cause of his happiness or unhappiness, but he
   makes the whole matter depend upon himself and considers himself a citizen
   of the city of God which is made up of men and gods. Euripides speaks in
   harmony with this thought when he says,

   " As all the heavens are open to the eagle's flight i So all the earth is
   for a noble man his fatherland."

   Therefore, just as a man who was living in his own country but in a
   different house from the one where he was born would be thought silly and
   an object of laughter if he should weep and wail because of this, so
   whoever considers it a misfortune because he is living in another city and
   not the one where he happens to have been born would rightly be considered
   foolish and stupid. Furthermore, how should exile be an obstacle to the
   cultivation

   16 Cf. Cicero, Tusc. Disp. V, 37, 108.

   24 f. Frag. 1031 (ed. Nauck). Ovid lias an interesting Latin version: Omne
   solum forti patria est, ut piscibus aequor,

   Ut volucri, vacuo quidquid in orbe patet. (Fasti I, 11. 493 f.)


   VI

   of the things that are one's own and to the acquisition of virtue, when no
   one was ever hindered from the knowledge and practice of what is needful
   because of exile? May it not even be true that exile contributes to that
   end, since it furnishes men leisure and a greater opportunity for learning
   the good and practicing it than formerly, in that they are not forced by
   what only seems to be their fatherland into performing political duties,
   and they are not annoyed by their kinsmen nor by men who only seem to be
   their friends, who are skilful in fettering them and dragging them away
   from the pursuit of better things? In fact, there have been cases where
   exile was an absolute blessing as it was to Diogenes, who by his exile was
   transformed from an ordinary citizen into a philosopher, and instead of
   sitting idly in Sinope, he busied himself in Greece, and in the pursuit of
   virtue came to surpass the philosophers. To others who were in poor health
   as the result of overindulgence and high living, exile has been a source
   of strength because they were forced to live a more manly life. We even
   know of some who were cured of chronic ailments in exile, as for instance,
   in our day Spartiacus, the Lacedaemonian, who suffered long from a weak
   chest and for this reason was often ill from high living, but when he
   stopped living a life of luxury, he ceased to be ill. They say that others
   addicted to high living have got rid of gout, although they were
   previously completely bed-ridden by the disease—people whom exile
   compelled to become accustomed to living more simply and by this very
   thing were brought back to health. Thus it appears that by treating them
   better than they treat themselves, exile helps rather than hinders health
   both of body and of spirit.

   It is not true, moreover, that exiles lack the very necessities of life.
   To be sure men who are idle and unresourceful and unable to play the part
   of a man are generally in want and without resources even when they are in
   their own country, but energetic and hard working and intelligent men, no
   matter where they go, fare well and live without want. We do not feel the
   lack of many things unless we wish to live luxuriously:

   " For what do mortals need beside two things only, The bread of Demeter
   and a drink of the Water-carrier, Which are at hand and have been made to
   nourish us? "

   Let me add that men who are worth anything not only easily manage well so
   far as the necessities of life are concerned, when they are in exile, but
   often acquire great fortunes. At any rate

   29-31 Frag, 884 (ed. Nauck).


   73

   Odysseus, in worse plight than any exile one may say, since he was alone
   and naked and shipwrecked, when he arrived among strangers, the
   Phaeacians, was nevertheless able to enrich himself abundantly. And when
   Themistocles was banished from home, going to people who were not only not
   friendly, but actual enemies and barbarians, the Persians, he received a
   gift of three cities, Myus, Magnesia, and Lampsacus, as a source of
   livelihood. Dio of Sjrracuse too, deprived by Dionysius the tyrant of all
   his possessions, when he was banished from his country waxed so rich in
   exile that he raised a mercenary army, went with it to Sicily, and freed
   the island of the tyrant. Who, then, if he were in his right mind, looking
   at these cases would still maintain that banishment is the cause of want
   for all exiles? Furthermore, it is not at all necessary for exiles to
   suffer ill-repute because of their banishment, since everyone knows that
   many trials are badly judged and many people are unjustly banished from
   their country, and that in the past there have been cases of good men who
   have been exiled by their countrymen, as for example from Athens Aristides
   the Just and from Ephesus Hermodorus, because of whose banishment
   Heraclitus bade the Ephesians, every grown man of them, go hang
   themselves. In fact some exiles even became very famous, as Diogenes of
   Sinope and Clearchus, the Lacedaemonian, who with Cyrus marched against
   Artaxerxes, not to mention more. How, pray, could this condition in which
   some people have become more renowned than before be responsible for
   ill-repute?

   But, you insist, Euripides says that exiles lose their personal liberty
   when they are deprived of their freedom of speech. For he represents
   Jocasta asking Polynices her son what misfortunes an exile has to bear. He
   answers,

   " One greatest of all, that he has not freedom of speech."

   She replies,

   " You name the plight of a slave, not to be able to say what one thinks."

   But I should say in rejoinder: " You are right, Euripides, when you say
   that it is the condition of a slave not to say what one thinks when one
   ought to speak, for it is not always, nor everywhere, nor before everyone
   that we should say what we think. But that one point, it seems to me, is
   not well-taken, that exiles do not have freedom of speech, if to you
   freedom ox speech means not suppressing whatever one chances to think. For
   it is not as exiles that men fear to say what they think, but as men

   20 Cf. Xenophon, Anabasis I, 1, 9. 27, 29 Phaenissae 391 f.


   75

   afraid lest from speaking pain or death or punishment or some such other
   thing shall befall them. Fear is the cause of this, not exile. For to many
   people, nay to most, even though dwelling safely in their native city,
   fear of what seem to them dire consequences of free speech is present.
   However, the courageous man, in exile no less than at home, is dauntless
   in the face of all such fears; for that reason also he has the courage to
   say what he thinks equally at home or in exile." Such are the things one
   might reply to Euripides. But tell me, my friend, when Diogenes was in
   exile at Athens, or when he was sold by pirates and came to Corinth, did
   anyone, Athenian or Corinthian, ever exhibit greater freedom of speech
   than he? And again, were any of his contemporaries freer than Diogenes?
   Why, even Xeniades, who bought him, he ruled as a master rules a slave.
   But why should I employ examples of long ago? Are you not aware that I am
   an exile? Well, then, have I been deprived of freedom of speech? Have I
   been bereft of the privilege of saying what I think? Have you or anyone
   else ever seen me cringing before anyone just because I am an exile, or
   thinking that my lot is worse now than formerly? No, I'll wager that you
   would say that you have never seen me complaining or disheartened because
   of my banishment, for if I have been deprived of my country, I have not
   been deprived of my ability to endure exile.

   The reflections which I employ for my own benefit so as not to be irked by
   exile, I should like to repeat to you. It seems to me that exile does not
   strip a man entirely, not even of the things which the average man calls
   goods, as I have just shown. But if he is deprived of some or all of them,
   he is still not deprived of the things which are truly goods, Certainly
   the exile is not prevented from possessing courage and justice simply
   because he is banished, nor self-control, nor understanding, nor any of
   the other virtues which when present serve to bring honor and benefit to a
   man and show him to be praiseworthy and of good repute, but when absent,
   serve to cause him harm and dishonor and show him to be wicked and of
   ill-repute. Since this is true, if you are that good man and have his
   virtues, exile will not harm or degrade you, because the virtues are
   present in you which are most able to help and to sustain you. But if you
   are bad, it is the evil that harms you and not exile; and the misery you
   feel in exile is the product of evil, not of exile. It is from this you
   must hasten to secure release rather than from exile. These things I

   (Second Defence of the People of England, Prose Works of John Milton ed.
   K. W. Griswold [Philadelphia, 18451 H, p. 489).


   77

   used to repeat to myself and I say them to you now. If you are wise, you
   will not consider that exile is a thing to be dreaded, since others bear
   it easily, but evil. It makes wretched every man. in whom it is present.
   And neither of the two necessary alternatives is a just cause for
   repining. For either you were banished justly or unjustly. If justly, how
   can it be right or fitting to feel aggrieved at just punishment? If
   unjustly, the evil involved is not ours, but falls upon those who banished
   us,—if in fact you agree that doing a wrong (as they have done) is the
   most hateful thing in the world, while suffering a wrong (as has been our
   fate) in the eyes of the gods and of just men is held a ground not for
   hate but for help.

   X

   WILL THE PHILOSOPHER PROSECUTE ANYONE FOR PERSONAL INJURY?

   He said that he himself would never prosecute anyone for personal injury
   nor recommend it to anyone else who claimed to be a philosopher. For
   actually none of the things which people fancy they suffer as personal
   injuries are an injury or a disgrace to those who experience them, such as
   being reviled or struck or spit upon. Of these the hardest to bear are
   blows. That there is nothing shameful or insulting about them however is
   clear from the fact that Lacedaemonian boys are whipped publicly, and they
   exult in it. If, then, the philosopher cannot despise blows and insults,
   when he ought obviously to despise even death, what good would he be? Well
   and good, you say, but the spirit of the man who does such things is
   monstrous, executing his purpose to insult by jeering and a slap in the
   face, or by abusive language or by some other such action. You know, of
   course, that Demosthenes holds that people can insult even by a glance and
   that such things are intolerable and that men in one way or another are
   driven mad by them. So it is that men who do not know what is really good
   and what is shameful, having regard only for common opinion, think they
   are insulted if someone gives them a malignant glance or laughs or strikes
   them or reviles

   22 The scourging of the Spartan boys before the altar of Artemis is
   referred to by Epictetus, Disc. I, 2, 2; Cicero Tusc. Disp. II, 20, 46;
   Plutarch Instituta Laconica 40 (2S9D) (Moralia III, pp. 44&-4 ( ed.
   Babbitt)

   27 Kara Mei5/ou 72


   79

   them. But the wise and sensible man, such as the philosopher ought to be,
   is not disturbed by any of these things. He does not think that disgrace
   lies in enduring them, but rather in doing them. For what does the man who
   submits to insult do that is wrong? It is the doer of wrong who forthwith
   puts himself to shame, while the sufferer, who does nothing but submit,
   has no reason whatever to feel shame or disgrace. Therefore the sensible
   man would not go to law nor bring indictments, since he would not even
   consider that he had been insulted. Besides, to be annoyed or racked about
   such things would be petty. Rather he will easily and silently bear what
   has happened, since this befits one whose purpose is to be noble-minded.
   Socrates, you remember, was clearly of this frame of mind who, though
   publicly ridiculed by Aristophanes, was not angry, but when he happened to
   meet him, asked him if he would like to use him for some other role. Can't
   you imagine how quickly he would have flared up in anger at some petty
   abuse, this man who showed no concern even when abused in the public
   theatre! And the good Phocion, when his wife had been reviled by someone,
   so far from prosecuting the fellow when he came in fear and asked
   forgiveness of Phocion, saying that he did not know it was his wife whom
   he had offended, merely replied, " But my wife has suffered nothing at
   your hands, though perhaps some other woman has, so you have no need to
   apologize to me." And I might mention many other men who have experienced
   insult, some wronged by word, others by violence and bodily harm, who do
   not appear to have defended their rights against their assailants nor to
   have proceeded against them in any other way, but very meekly bore their
   wrong. And in this they were quite right. For to scheme how to bite back
   the biter and to return evil for evil is the act not of a human being but
   of a wild beast, which is incapable of reasoning that the majority of
   wrongs are done to men through ignorance and misunderstanding, from which
   man will cease as soon as he has been taught. But to accept injury not in
   a spirit of savage resentment and to show ourselves not implacable toward
   those who wrong us, but rather to be a source of good hope to them is
   characteristic of a benevolent and civilized way of life. How much better
   a figure does the philosopher make so conducting himself as to deem worthy
   of forgiveness anyone who wrongs him, than to behave as if ready to defend
   himself with legal

   bears out Musonius' estimate of his character. (Phocion XXXVI.)

   30 Socrates' conviction that man does wrong because he does not know

   what is right is well expressed by Xenophon. Cf. Cyropaedia III, 1, 38,


   81

   procedure and indictments, Avhile in reality he is behaving in an unseemly
   manner and acting quite contrary to his own teaching. To be sure he says
   that a good man can never be wronged by a bad man; but nevertheless he
   draws up an indictment as having been wronged by bad men, while claiming
   to be accounted a good man himself.

   XI

   WHAT MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD IS APPROPRIATE FOR A PHILOSOPHER?

   There is also another means of livelihood in no way inferior to this,
   indeed, perhaps it would not be unreasonable to consider it even better
   for a strong person, namely earning a living from the soil, whether one
   owns his own land or not. For many who are farming land owned either by
   the state or by other private individuals are yet able to support not only
   themselves but their wives and children as well; and some in fact attain
   even a high degree of prosperity by hard work with their own hands. For
   the earth repays most justly and well those who cultivate her, returning
   many times as much as she received and furnishing an abundance of all the
   necessities of life to anyone who is willing to work; and this she does
   without violating one's dignity or self-respect. You may be sure that no
   one who was not demoralized by soft living would say that the labor of the
   farmer was degrading or unfit for a good man. How, I ask, could planting
   trees or ploughing or pruning vines not be honorable? Are not sowing seed
   and harvesting and threshing all occupations for free men and befitting
   good men? Even keeping flocks, as it did not disgrace Hesiod nor prevent
   him from being a poet and beloved of the gods, so it would not prevent
   anyone else. In fact to me this is the most agreeable of all aspects of
   farming, because it gives the spirit more leisure to reflect on and to
   investigate the things that have to do with our own development and
   training. For while, to be sure, the occupations which strain and tire the
   whole body compel the mind to share in concentration upon

   for a philosopher were may, perhaps, be found in Cicero, De Officiis I,
   42, 151.

   13 Horace (Satire II, 2) shows what satisfaction Ofellus, once owner of
   the land, now tenant farmer, derives from a life of farming. 20 Columella
   (De. Re Rustica, Praef. 10-11) considers farming the only suitable life
   for a free man.


   83

   them, or at all events, upon the body, yet the occupations which require
   not too much physical exertion do not hinder the mind from reflecting on
   some of the higher things and by such reasoning from increasing its own
   wisdom—a goal toward which every philosopher earnestly strives. For these
   reasons I recommend particularly the life of a shepherd. But, speaking
   generally, if one devotes himself to the life of philosophy and tills the
   land at the same time, I should not compare any other way of life to his
   nor prefer any other means of livelihood. For is it not " living more in
   accord with nature " to draw one's sustenance directly from the earth,
   which is the nurse and mother of us all, rather than from some other
   source? Is it not more like the life of a man to live in the country than
   to sit idly in the city, like the sophists? Who will say that it is not
   more healthy to live out of doors than to shun the open air and the heat
   of the sun? Tell me, do you think it is more fitting for a free man by his
   own labor to procure for himself the necessities of life or to receive
   them from others? But surely it is plain that not to require another's
   help for one's need is more dignified than asking for it, How very good
   and happy and blessed of heaven is the life of the soil, when along with
   it the goods of the spirit are not neglected, the example of Myson of Chen
   may show, whom the god called " wise," and Aglaus of Psophis whom he
   hailed as " happy," both of whom lived on the land and tilled the soil
   with their own hands, and held aloof from the life of the town. Is not
   their example worthy of emulation and an incentive to follow in their
   footsteps and to embrace the life of husbandry with a zeal like theirs?

   What, perhaps someone may say, is it not preposterous for an educated man
   who is able to influence the young to the study of philosophy to work the
   land and to do manual labor just like a peasant? Yes, that would be really
   too bad if working the land prevented him from the pursuit of philosophy
   or from helping others to its attainment. But since that is not so, pupils
   would seem to me rather benefited by not meeting with their teacher in the
   city nor listening to his formal lectures and discussions, but by seeing
   him at work in the fields, demonstrating by his own labor the lessons
   which philosophy inculcates—that one should endure hardships, and suffer
   the pains of labor with his own body, rather than depend upon another for
   sustenance. What is there to prevent a student while he is working from
   listening to a teacher speaking about self-control or justice or
   endurance? For those who teach philosophy well do not need many words, nor
   is there any need that pupils should try to master all this current


   85

   mass of precepts on which we see our sophists pride themselves; they are
   enough to consume a whole life-time. But the most necessary and useful
   things it is not impossible for men to learn in addition to their farm
   work, especially if they are not kept at work constantly but have periods
   of rest. Now I know perfectly well that few will wish to learn in this
   way, yet it would be better if the majority of young men who say they are
   studying philosophy did not go near a philosopher, I mean those spoiled
   and effeminate fellows by whose presence the good name of philosophy is
   stained. For of the true lovers of philosophy, there is not one who would
   not be willing to live with a good man in the country, even if the place
   be very rude, since he would be bound to profit greatly from this sojourn
   by living with his teacher night and day, by being away from the evils of
   the city, which are an obstacle to the study of philosophy, and from the
   fact that his conduct, whether good or bad, cannot escape observation—a
   great advantage to those who are learning. Also to eat and drink and sleep
   under the supervision of a good man is a great benefit. All these things,
   which would come about inevitably from living together in the country,
   Theognis praised in the verses where he says,

   " Drink and eat and sit down with good men, and win the approval of those
   whose influence and power is great." That he means that none others but
   good men have great power for the good of men, if one eats and drinks and
   sits down with them, he has shown in the following:

   " From good men you will learn good, but if you mingle with the bad you
   will destroy even such soul as you had."

   Therefore let no one say that farming is an obstacle to learning or to
   teaching the lessons of duty, for it can scarcely be such an obstacle, if
   we realize that under these conditions the pupil lives in closest
   association with the teacher, and the teacher has the pupil constantly at
   hand. And where this is the case, earning a living by farming seems to be
   most suitable for a philosopher.

   XII

   ON SEXUAL INDULGENCE

   Not the least significant part of the life of luxury and self-indulgence
   lies also in sexual excess; for example those who lead

   16 f., 21 f. Elegies 33-36.

   25 Persius' description of his very happy relationship with his teacher
   Cornutus bears out Musonius' contention. Cf. Sat. V, 41-44.


   87

   such a life crave a variety of loves not only lawful but unlawful ones as
   well, not women alone but also men; sometimes they pursue one love and
   sometimes another, and not being satisfied with those which are available,
   pursue those which are rare and inaccessible, and invent shameful
   intimacies, all of which constitute a grave indictment of manhood. Men who
   are not wantons or immoral are bound to consider sexual intercourse
   justified only when it occurs in marriage and is indulged in for the
   purpose of begetting children, since that is lawful, but unjust and
   unlawful when it is mere pleasure-seeking, even in marriage. But of all
   sexual relations those involving adultery are most unlawful, and no more
   tolerable are those of men with men, because it is a monstrous thing and
   contrary to nature. But, furthermore, leaving out of consideration
   adultery, all intercourse with women which is without lawful character is
   shameful and is practiced from lack of self-restraint. So no one with any
   self-control would think of having relations with a courtesan or a free
   woman apart from marriage, no, nor even with his own maid-servant. The
   fact that those relationships are not lawful or seemly makes them a
   disgrace and a reproach to those seeking them; whence it is that no one
   dares to do any of these things openly, not even if he has all but lost
   the ability to blush, and those who are not completely degenerate dare to
   do these things only in hiding and in secret. And yet to attempt to cover
   up what one is doing is equivalent to a confession of guilt. " That's all
   very well," you say, " but unlike the adulterer who wrongs the husband of
   the woman he corrupts, the man who has relations with a courtesan or a
   woman who has no husband wrongs no one for he does not destroy anyone's
   hope of children." I continue to maintain that everyone who sins and does
   wrong, even if it affects none of the people about him, yet immediately
   reveals himself as a worse and a less honorable person; for the wrong-doer
   by the very fact of doing wrong is worse and less honorable. Not to
   mention the injustice of the thing, there must be sheer wantonness in
   anyone yielding to the temptation of shameful pleasure and like swine
   rejoicing in his own vileness. In this category belongs the man who has
   relations with his own slave-maid, a thing which some people consider
   quite without blame, since every master is held to have it in his power to
   use his slave as he wishes. In reply to this I have just one thing to say:
   if it seems neither shameful nor out of place for a master to have
   relations with his own slave, particularly if she happens to be unmarried,
   let him consider how he would like it if his wife had relations with a
   male slave. Would it not seem completely intolerable not only if the woman
   who


   89

   had a lawful husband had relations with a slave, but even if a woman
   without a husband should have? And yet surely one will not expect men to
   be less moral than women, nor less capable of disciplining their desires,
   thereby revealing the stronger in judgment inferior to the weaker, the
   rulers to the ruled. In fact, it behooves men to be much better if they
   expect to be superior to women, for surely if they appear to be less
   self-controlled they will also be baser characters. What need is there to
   say that it is an act of licentiousness and nothing less for a master to
   have relations with a slave? Everyone knows that.

   XIIIA

   WHAT IS THE CHIEF END OF MARRIAGE?

   [That the primary end of marriage is community of life with a view to the
   procreation of children.] The husband and wife, he used to say, should
   come together for the purpose of making a life in common and of
   procreating children, and furthermore of regarding all things in common
   between them, and nothing peculiar or private to one or the other, not
   even their own bodies. The birth of a human being which results from such
   a union is to be sure something marvelous, but it is not yet enough for
   the relation of husband and wife, inasmuch as quite apart from marriage it
   could result from any other sexual union, just as in the case of animals.
   But in marriage there must be above all perfect companionship and mutual
   love of husband and wife, both in health and in sickness and under all
   conditions, since it was with desire for this as well as for having
   children that both entered upon marriage. Where, then, this love for each
   other is perfect and the two share it completely, each striving to outdo
   the other in devotion, the marriage is ideal and worthy of envy, for such
   a union is beautiful. But where each looks only to his own interests and
   neglects the other, or, what is worse, when one is so minded and lives in
   the same house but fixes his attention elsewhere and is not willing to
   pull together with his yoke-mate nor to agree, then the union is doomed to
   disaster and though they live together, yet their common interests fare
   badly; eventually they separate entirely or they remain together and
   suffer what is worse than loneliness.

   10 The first sentence seems to be an interpolation.

   22 This fine passage, reminiscent of the Pauline " in honour preferring
   one another " (Rom, XII, 10) recalls Tacitus' description of the
   relationship between Agricola and his wife. Cf. Agricola 6.


   91

   XIIIB

   WHAT IS THE CHIEF END OF MARRIAGE?

   Therefore those who contemplate marriage ought to have regard neither for
   family, whether either one be of high-born parents, nor for wealth,
   whether on either side there be great possessions, nor for physical
   traits, whether one or the other have beauty. For neither wealth nor
   beauty nor high birth is effective in promoting partnership of interest or
   sympathy, nor again are they significant for producing children. But as
   for the body it is enough for marriage that it be healthy, of normal
   appearance, and capable of hard work, such as would be less exposed to the
   snares of tempters, better adapted to perform physical labor, and not
   wanting in strength to beget or to bear children. With respect to
   character or soul one should expect that it be habituated to self-control
   and justice, and in a word, naturally disposed to virtue. <These qualities
   should be present in both man and wife.) For without sympathy of mind and
   character between husband and wife, what marriage can be good, what
   partnership advantageous? How could two human beings who are base have
   sympathy of spirit one with the other? Or how could one that is good be in
   harmony with one that is bad? No more than a crooked piece of wood could
   be fitted to a straight one, or two crooked ones be put together. For the
   crooked one will not fit another crooked one, and much less the opposite,
   a crooked with a straight one. So a wicked man is not friendly to a wicked
   one, nor does he agree with him, and much less with a good man.

   XIV

   IS MARRIAGE A HANDICAP FOR THE PURSUIT OF PHILOSOPHY?

   Again when someone said that marriage and living with a wife seemed to him
   a handicap to the pursuit of philosophy, Musonius said that it was no
   handicap to Pythagoras, nor to Socrates, nor to Crates, each of whom lived
   with a wife, and one could not

   13 A connecting sentence seems to have dropped out of the Greek

   text at this point.

   19 f. Cf. Plato Lysis 211D.


   03

   mention better philosophers than these. Crates, although homeless and
   completely without property or possessions, was nevertheless married;
   furthermore, not having a shelter of his own, he spent his days and nights
   in the public porticoes of Athens together with his wife. How, then, can
   we, who have a home to start with and some of us even have servants to
   work for us, venture to say that marriage is a handicap for philosophy?
   Now the philosopher is indeed the teacher and leader of men in all the
   things which are appropriate for men according to nature, and marriage, if
   anything, is manifestly in accord with nature. For, to what other purpose
   did the creator of mankind first divide our human race into two sexes,
   male and female, then implant in each a strong desire for association and
   union with the other, instilling in both a powerful longing each for the
   other, the male for the female and the female for the male? Is it not then
   plain that he wished the two to be united and live together, and by their
   joint efforts to devise a way of life in common, and to produce and rear
   children together, so that the race might never die? Tell me, then, is it
   fitting for each man to act for himself alone or to act in the interest of
   his neighbor also, not only that there may be homes in the city but also
   that the city may not be deserted and that the common good may best be
   served? If you say that each one should look out for his own interests
   alone, you represent man as no different from a wolf or any other of the
   wildest beasts which are born, to live by violence and plunder, sparing
   nothing from which they may gain some advantage, having no part in a life
   in common with others, no part in cooperation with others, no share of any
   notion of justice. If you will agree that man's nature most closely
   resembles the bee which cannot live alone (for it dies when left alone),
   but bends its energies to the one common task of his fellows and toils and
   works together with his neighbors; if this is so, and in addition you
   recognize that for man evil consists in injustice and cruelty and
   indifference to a neighbor's trouble, while virtue is brotherly love and
   goodness and justice and beneficence and concern for the welfare of one's
   neighbor—with such ideas, I say, it would be each man's duty to take
   thought for his own city, and to make of his home a rampart for its
   protection. But the first step toward making his home such a rampart is
   marriage. Thus whoever destroys human marriage destroys the home, the
   city, and the whole human race. For it would not last if there were no
   procreation of children and there would be no just and lawful procreation
   of children without marriage. That the home or the city does not depend
   upon women alone or upon men alone, but upon their


   95

   union with each other is evident. One could find no other association more
   necessary nor more pleasant than that of men and women. For what man is so
   devoted to his friend as a loving wife is to her husband? What brother to
   a brother? What son to his parents? Who is so longed for when absent as a
   husband by his wife, or a wife by her husband? Whose presence would do
   more to lighten grief or increase joy or remedy misfortune? To whom is
   everything judged to be common, body, soul, and possessions, except man
   and wife? For these reasons all men consider the love of man and wife to
   be the highest form of love; and no reasonable mother or father would
   expect to entertain a deeper love for his own child than for the one
   joined to him in marriage. Indeed how much the love of a wife for her
   husband surpasses the love of parents for their children is clearly
   illustrated by the familiar story of how Admetus, receiving from the gods
   the privilege of living twice the time allotted to him if he could get
   someone else to die in his place, found his parents unwilling to die for
   him although they were old, but his wedded wife Alcestis, though still
   very young, readily accepted death hi her husband's place.

   How great and worthy an estate is marriage is plain from this also, that
   gods watch over it, great gods, too, in the estimation of men; first Hera
   (and for this reason we address her as the patroness of wedlock), then
   Eros, then Aphrodite, for we assume that all of these perform the function
   of bringing together man and woman for the procreation of children. Where,
   indeed, does Eros more properly belong than in the lawful union of man and
   wife? Where Hera? Where Aphrodite? When would one more appropriately pray
   to these divinities than when entering into marriage? What should we more
   properly call the work of Aphrodite than the joining of wife and husband?
   Why, then, should anyone say that such great divinities watch over and
   guard marriage and the procreation of children, unless these things are
   the proper concern of man? Why should one say that they are the proper
   concern of man but not the concern of the philosopher? Can it be because
   the philosopher is worse than other men? Certainly he ought not to be
   worse, but better and more just and more truly good. Or could one say that
   the man who does not take an interest in his city is not worse and more
   unjust than the man who does, the man who looks out only for his own
   interests is not worse than the one who looks out for the common good? Or
   can it be that the man who chooses the single life is more patriotic, more
   a friend and partner of his fellow-man, than the man who maintains a home
   and rears


   97

   children and contributes to the growth of his city, which is exactly what
   a married man does? It is clear, therefore, that it is fitting for a
   philosopher to concern himself with marriage and having children. And if
   this is fitting, how, my young friend, could that argument of yours that
   marriage is a handicap for a philosopher ever be sound? For manifestly the
   study of philosophy is nothing else than to search out by reason what is
   right and proper and by deeds to put it into practice. Such, then, were
   the words he spoke at that time.

   XV

   SHOULD EVERY CHILD THAT IS BORN BE RAISED?

   Is it not true that the lawgivers, whose special function it was by
   careful search to discern what is good for the state and what is bad, what
   promotes and what is detrimental to the common good, all considered the
   increase of the homes of the citizens the most fortunate thing for the
   cities and the decrease of them the most shameful thing? And when the
   citizens had few or no children did they not regard it as a loss, but when
   they had children, yes, plenty of them, did they not regard it as a gain?
   So it was for this reason that they forbade women to suffer abortions and
   imposed a penalty upon those who disobeyed; for this reason they
   discouraged them from choosing childlessness and avoiding parenthood, and
   for this reason they gave to both husband and wife a reward for large
   families, and set a penalty upon childlessness. How, then, can we avoid
   doing wrong and breaking the law if we do the opposite of the wish of the
   lawgivers, godlike men and dear to the gods, whom it is considered good
   and advantageous to follow? And certainly we do the opposite if we avoid
   having many children. How can we help committing a sin against the gods of
   our fathers and against Zeus, guardian of the race, if we do this? For
   just as the man who is unjust to strangers sins against Zeus, god of
   hospitality, and one who is unjust to friends sins against Zeus, god of
   friendship, so whoever is unjust to his own family sins against the gods
   of his fathers and against Zeus, guardian of the family, from whom

   was passed in 18 B. C. and the Lex Papia Poppaea passed in 9 A. D. Cf.
   Suetonius, Aug. XXXIV.


   99

   wrongs done to the family are not hidden, and surely one who sins against
   the gods is impious. And that raising many children is an honorable and
   profitable thing one may gather from the fact that a man who has many
   children is honored in the city, that he has the respect of his neighbors,
   that he has more influence than his equals if they are not equally blest
   with children. I need not argue that a man with many friends is more
   powerful than one who has no friends, and so a man who has many children
   is more powerful than one without any or with only a few children, or
   rather much more so, since a son is closer than a friend. One may remark
   what a fine sight it is to see a man or woman surrounded by their
   children. Surely one could not witness a procession arrayed in honor of
   the gods so beautiful nor a choral dance performed in order at a religious
   celebration so well worth seeing as a chorus of children forming a guard
   of honor for their father or mother in the city of their birth, leading
   their parents by the hand or dutifully caring for them in some other way.
   What is more beautiful than this sight? What is more enviable than these
   parents, especially if they are good people? For whom would one more
   gladly join in praying for blessings from the gods, or whom would one be
   more willing to assist in need? Very true, you say, but I am a poor man
   and quite without means, and if I have many children, from what source
   should I find food for them all? But pray, whence do the little birds,
   which are much poorer than you, feed their young, the swallows and
   nightingales and larks and blackbirds? Homer speaks of them in these
   words:

   " Even as a bird carries to her unfledged young whatever morsels she
   happens to come upon, though she fares badly herself— "

   Do these creatures surpass man in intelligence? You certainly would not
   say that. In strength and endurance, then? No, still less in that respect.
   Well, then, do they put away food and store it up? <Not at all, and yet
   they rear their young and find sustenance for all that are born to them.
   The plea of poverty, therefore, is unjustified.)

   But what seems to me most monstrous of all, some who do not even have
   poverty as an excuse, and in spite of prosperity and even riches are so
   inhuman as not to rear later-born offspring

   27 A transitional sentence between the end of the new text and the
   beginning of the second part (XVB) of the traditional text seems to be
   missing.


   101

   in order that those earlier born may inherit greater wealth—by such a deed
   of wickedness planning prosperity for their surviving children. That these
   may have a greater share of their father's goods, their parents rob them
   of brothers, never having learned how much better it is to have many
   brothers than to have many possessions. For possessions inspire intrigue
   on the part of the neighbors, but brothers discourage intriguers. And
   possessions need support, but brothers are the strongest supporters. One
   cannot compare a good friend to a brother nor the help which others,
   friends and equals, give to that which a brother gives. What good would
   one compare to the good will of a brother as a pledge of security? What
   better disposed sharer of common goods could one find than a good brother?
   Whose presence in misfortune would one desire more than such a brother's?
   For my part I consider the man most enviable who lives amid a number of
   like-minded brothers, and I consider most beloved of the gods the man who
   has these blessings at home. Therefore I believe that each one of us ought
   to try to leave brothers rather than money to our children so as to leave
   greater assurances of blessings.

   XVI

   MUST ONE OBEY ONE'S PARENTS UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES?

   A certain young man who wished to study philosophy, but was forbidden by
   his father to do so, put this question to him: " Tell me, Musonius, must
   one obey one's parents in all things, or are there some circumstances
   under which one need not heed them? " And Musonius replied, " That
   everyone should obey his mother and father seems a good thing, and I
   certainly recommend it. However, let us see what this matter of obedience
   is, or rather, first, what is the nature of disobedience, and let us
   consider who the disobedient person is, if in this way we may better
   understand what the nature of obedience is.

   Now then, take this case. If a father who is not a physician and not
   experienced in matters of health or sickness should prescribe for his
   invalid son something which was harmful and injurious, and the son was
   aware of that fact, surely in not following his

   20-23 Aulus Gellius (Noct. Att. II, 7) tells us that this was a favorite
   topic for discussion by the philosophers.


   103

   father's prescription he is not disobeying and is not disobedient, is he?
   It would not seem so. Or again, suppose the father himself were ill and
   should demand wine and food which he ought not to have, and which probably
   would aggravate his illness if he took it, and his son, realizing this,
   would not give it to him, surely he is not disobeying his father, is he?
   Certainly one cannot think so. And yet I fancy one would consider far less
   disobedient than in this case, the man who, having a money-loving father,
   is ordered by him to steal or make away with money entrusted to him, but
   does not carry out the order. Or do you think that there are no fathers
   who give such orders to their children? Well, I know a father so depraved
   that, having a son conspicuous for youthful beauty, he sold him into a
   life of shame. If, now, that lad who was sold and sent into such a life by
   his father had refused and would not go, should we say that he was
   disobedient or that he was showing purity of character? Surely even to ask
   the question is scarcely necessary. To be sure, disobedience and the
   disobedient person are terms of reproach and shame, but refusing to do
   what one ought not to do merits praise rather than blame. Therefore
   whether one's father or the archon or even the tyrant orders something
   wrong or unjust or shameful, and one does not carry out the order, he is
   in no way disobeying, inasmuch as he does no wrong nor fails of doing
   right. He only disobeys who disregards and refuses to carry out good and
   honorable and useful orders. Such is the disobedient man.

   But the obedient person behaves in just the opposite way and is completely
   different from him; he would be the kind of man who listens to anyone who
   counsels what is fitting and follows it voluntarily. That is the obedient
   man. Thus in relation to his parents also, one is obedient when he does
   voluntarily whatever they counsel that is good and fitting. For my part,
   moreover, I should say that anyone who did what was right and expedient,
   even when his parents did not counsel it, was obeying his parents, and in
   support of my reasoning, consider this. In my opinion the man who does
   what his father desires and follows his father's wishes is obeying his
   father; and he who does what he ought and pursues the better course is
   following the wish of his father. How is that? Because surely all parents
   have the interests of their children at heart, and because of that
   interest they wish them to do what is right and advantageous. Consequently
   one who does what is right and useful is doing what his parents wish and
   so is obedient to his parents in doing it, even if his parents do not
   order him in so many words to do these things. This one thing only and
   nothing else should he take into consideration


   105

   who wishes to obey his parents in each act—whether what he plans to do is
   good and advantageous. Thus if such a conviction be entertained, whatever
   a man's action may be, it is the act of one obedient to his parents.

   And so you, my young friend, do not fear that you will disobey your
   father, if when your father bids you do something which is not right, you
   refrain from doing it, or when he forbids you to do something which is
   right you do not refrain from doing it. Do not let your father be an
   excuse to you for wrong-doing whether he bids you do something which is
   not right or forbids you to do what is right. For there is no necessity
   for you to comply with evil injunctions, and you yourself seem not unaware
   of this. You would certainly not submit to your father in musical matters
   if, with no knowledge of music, he should order you to play the lyre
   incorrectly, or if he knew nothing of grammar and you did, he should order
   you to write and read, not as you had learned but otherwise; and if,
   finally, with no knowledge of how to steer a ship, he should order you who
   did understand to handle the helm in the wrong way, you would not heed
   him. Well, then, enough of that.

   Now if your father, knowing nothing about the subject, should forbid you
   who had learned and comprehended what philosophy is to study philosophy,
   would you be bound to heed him, or would you not rather be obligated to
   teach him better, since he is giving bad advice? That seems to me to be
   the answer. Perhaps by using reason alone one might persuade his father to
   adopt the attitude he ought in regard to philosophy if the father's
   disposition is not too obstinate. If, however, he should not be persuaded
   by argument and would not yield, yet even then the conduct of his son will
   win him over if his son is truly putting his philosophy into practice.
   For, as a student of philosophy he will certainly be most eager to treat
   his father with the greatest possible consideration and will be most
   well-behaved and gentle; in his relations with his father he will never be
   contentious or self-willed, nor hasty or prone to anger; furthermore he
   will control his tongue and his appetite whether for food or for sexual
   temptations, and he will stand fast in the face of danger and hardships;
   and finally with competence in recognizing the true good, he will not let
   the apparent good pass without examination. As a result he will willingly
   give up all pleasures for his father's sake, and for him he will accept
   all manner of hardships willingly. To have such a son who would not offer
   prayers to the gods? Who, having one, would not love him because of whom
   he had become an envied and most blessed father in the eyes of all men of
   sound judgment?


   107

   If, then, my young friend, with a view to becoming such & man, as you
   surely will if you truly master the lessons of philosophy, you should not
   be able to induce your father to permit you to do as you wish, nor succeed
   in persuading him, reason thus: your father forbids you to study
   philosophy, but the common father of all men and gods, Zeus, bids you and
   exhorts you to do so. His command and law is that man be just and honest,
   beneficent, temperate, high-minded, superior to pain, superior to
   pleasure, free of all envy and all malice; to put it briefly, the law of
   Zeus bids man be good. But being good is the same as being a philosopher.
   If you obey your father, you will follow the will of a man; if you choose
   the philosopher's life, the will of God. It is plain, therefore, that your
   duty lies in the pursuit of philosophy rather than not. But, you say, your
   father will restrain you and actually shut you up to prevent your study of
   philosophy. Perhaps he will do so, but he will not prevent you from
   studying philosophy unless you are willing; for we do not study philosophy
   with our hands or feet or any other part of the body, but with the soul
   and with a very small part of it, that which we may call the reason. This
   God placed in the strongest place so that it might be inaccessible to
   sight and touch, free from all compulsion and in its own power.
   Particularly if your mind is good your father will not be able to prevent
   you from using it nor from thinking what you ought nor from liking the
   good and not liking the base; nor again-from choosing the one and
   rejecting the other. In the very act of doing this, you would be studying
   philosophy, and you would not need to wrap yourself up in a wo'rn cloak
   nor go without a chiton nor grow long hair nor deviate from the ordinary
   practices of the average man. To be sure, such things are well enough for
   professional philosophers, but philosophy does not consist in them, but
   rather in thinking out what is man's duty and meditating upon it."

   XVII

   WHAT IS THE BEST VIATICUM FOR OLD AGE?

   At another time when an old man asked him what was the best viaticum for
   old age, he said, the very one that is best for youth too, namely to live
   by method and in accord with nature. You would best understand what this
   means if you would realize that mankind was not created for pleasure. For
   that matter, neither was the horse or dog or cow created for pleasure, and
   all of these creatures are much less valuable than man. Certainly a


   113

   XVIIIA ON FOOD

   eating^ drinkfti ky in

   he hdhrtuafly disced, SsS ? ^t 0 ^ themes such as should prefer
   inexpensive fLf f somew hat as follows A, m Jo what is scarce, ITZ s^ml^T
   ^ ^TabundS ^hat is not . Now f «W Pjefer what is natural for menTo

   grams and those which thoul no , ^ 6arth is ^tural to Us and also food
   (other tha r 2? Cereals can ^urish man wel ' eated. Of these f oods the mo
   t LlTr?^ 3 Which are *>*S

   amnrnls. He held that ittas a £ T° ^^te for wild thinking and reasoning
   1?^ Tf food and a " obstacleto turbid darkened the £5^,^^ ^ f~m fth^ make
   larger use of it seem sW, ' f n aIs ° the P eo P ] e who «an of all
   creatures on eSthTth IeCt Furthe ™oreTas

   so he should be nourished*, a m n6areSt 1 of kin ^ the gods he vapors
   rising ilom the eartlS ^ like J he ^ ods " Now a nd so, he said, we ought
   tn h W , ater are sufficient for them the lightest and J UIes fo tht^^f °
   n food ^^st like S a ^ being so, wo P uld bVfinest I"?' S ° UlS W ° Uld be
   P U1 ^ and dry f us when he said, «f ■ ^ S6emed to But now, he said, we
   feedW T SOul 15 wis ^t and best " reasoning brutes. For ev en 3^V?™* Worse
   ^an the ut ^h, fall upon their f 00 »> y app etite

   faking a f USs about th ei ? r fond 683 they are »ot guilty of

   but they are - W^^tLST^ abo/t it

   only, nothing more. But weTcontrivT/ll K 8eekin « s atiety


   115

   music and medicine, so some have even written books on cooking which aim
   to increase the pleasure of the palate, but ruin the health. It is at all
   events a common observation that those who are luxurious and intemperate
   in food have much less vigorous health. Some, in fact, are like women who
   have the unnatural cravings of pregnancy; these men, like such women,
   refuse the most common foods and have their digestion utterly ruined.
   Thus, as worn-out iron constantly needs tempering, their appetites
   continually demand being sharpened either by neat wine or a sharp sauce or
   some sour relish. But no such man was the Laconian who, on seeing a man
   refuse to eat a young peacock or other expensive bird that was placed
   before him, and complain that he could not eat because of lack of
   appetite, remarked, " But I could eat a vulture or a buzzard." Zeno of
   Citium even when he was ill thought that no unusually delicate food should
   be brought him, and when the attending physician ordered him to eat squab,
   he would not allow it, and said, " Treat me as you would treat my slave
   Manes." For I imagine that he thought there should be nothing more
   delicate in his treatment than for one of his slaves if he were ill; for
   if they can be cured without receiving more delicate fare, so can we.
   Surely a good man should be no more delicate than a slave; and for that
   reason Zeno very likely thought he ought to beware of delicacy in diet and
   not yield to it in the least, for if he once yielded he would go the whole
   way, since in the matter of food and drink, pleasure accelerates its pace
   alarmingly. The words spoken on that occasion concerning food and
   nourishment seemed to us more unusual than the customary discourses day by
   day.

   22 Manes was a stock name for a slave. Cf. Epictetus Disc. HI, 26, 37.


   117

   XVIIIB ON FOOD

   Thoroughly shameful, he used to say, are gluttony and high living, and no
   one will dare deny it; yet I have observed very few aiming to shun these
   vices. On the contrary I notice that the majority of people strive to
   obtain these same foods when they are not available and when they are at
   hand are unable to refrain from them, and they use them so lavishly when
   they have them that they make for the detriment of their health. And yet
   what else is gluttony but intemperance in the matter of nourishment,
   causing men to prefer what is pleasant in food to what is beneficial? And
   high living is nothing but excess in table luxury. Now excess is always
   evil, but here particularly it reveals its true nature in these people
   since it makes them greedy like swine or dogs rather than men, and
   incapable of behaving properly with hands, or eyes, or gullet, so
   completely does the desire for pleasure in dainties of the table pervert
   them. How shameful it is to behave toward food in this way we may learn
   from the fact that we liken them to unreasoning animals rather than to
   intelligent human beings. Now if this is shameful, the opposite must be
   altogether good; that is, exercising moderation and decorum in eating,
   demonstrating one's self-control there first of all, not an easy thing to
   do, but one which requires much attention and practice. Why should this
   be? Because although there are many pleasures which lure man into
   wrong-doing and force him to yield to them contrary to what is good,
   pleasure in eating is probably the hardest of all to combat. For other
   pleasures we encounter less often, and we can refrain from some of them
   for months and whole years, but of necessity we are tempted by this one
   every day and usually twice a day, since it is not possible for man to
   live otherwise. Thus the oftener we are tempted by pleasure in eating, the
   more dangers there are involved. And indeed at each meal there is not one
   hazard for going wrong, but many. First of all, the man who eats more than
   he ought does wrong, and the man who eats in undue haste no less, and also
   the man who wallows in the pickles and sauces, and the man who prefers the
   sweeter foods to the more healthful ones, and the man who does not serve
   food of the same kind or amount to his guests as to himself. There is
   still another wrong in connection with eating, when we indulge in it at an


   119

   unseasonable time, and although there is something else we ought to do, we
   put it aside in order to eat. Since, then, these and even more vices are
   connected with eating, if a man wishes to show self-control, he must be
   free of all of them and not be guilty of any of them. To keep himself
   blameless and free from such errors one should by constant practice
   accustom himself to choosing food not for enjoyment but for nourishment,
   not to tickle his palate but to strengthen his body. Indeed the throat was
   designed to be a passage for food, not an organ of pleasure, and the
   stomach was made for the same purpose as the root was created in plants.
   For just as the root nourishes the plant by taking food from without, so
   the stomach nourishes the living being from the food and drink which are
   taken into it. And again just as plants receive nourishment that they may
   survive, and not for their pleasure, so in like manner food is to us the
   medicine of life. Therefore it is fitting for us to eat in order to live,
   not in order to have pleasure, if, at all events, we wish to keep in line
   with the wise words of Socrates, who said that the majority of men live to
   eat but that he ate in order to live. Certainly no reasonable being, whose
   ambition is to be a man, will think it desirable to be like the majority
   who live to eat, and like them, to spend his life in the chase after
   pleasure derived from food.

   That God who made man provided him food and drink for the sake of
   preserving his life and not for giving him pleasure, one can see very well
   from this: when food is performing its real function, it does not produce
   pleasure for man, that is in the process of digestion and assimilation. At
   that time we are being nourished and renew our strength, but we feel no
   sensation of pleasure; and yet there is a longer time involved in this
   process than in eating. Surely if God had planned eating as a pleasure for
   us, He would have had us enjoy it a longer time and not merely the brief
   moment when we are swallowing. And yet for the sake of that brief moment
   when we do experience pleasure, countless dainties are prepared, the sea
   is sailed from end to end, cooks are more in demand than farmers; some
   even squander the value of their estates to spread their tables, though
   their bodies are not at all benefited by the costliness of the food. Quite
   the contrary, people who eat the cheapest food are the strongest. Indeed
   you may notice that slaves are usually stronger than their masters,
   country men than city men, the poor than the rich, better able to do hard
   work, less fatigued by their labor, less

   18 This saying is frequently attributed to Socrates, though sometimes to
   Diogenes. Cf. Aulus Gellius Noct. Att. XIX, 2, 7 and Diogenes Laertius
   Live- II, 34.


   121

   frequently ill, enduring more cheerfully cold, heat, lack of sleep, and
   every such hardship. Furthermore, even if expensive and cheap food
   strengthened the body equally well, nevertheless one ought to choose the
   cheaper food because it is more conducive to temperance and more fitting
   for a good man. In general for men of sense and reason, in respect of
   food, what is easy to procure is better than what is hard to obtain, what
   requires no work than what requires it, what is available than what is not
   at hand. But to sum up the question of food, I maintain that its purpose
   should be to produce health and strength, that one should for that purpose
   eat only that which requires no great outlay, and finally that at table
   one should have regard for a fitting decorum and moderation, and most of
   all should be superior to the common vices of filth and greedy haste.

   XIX

   ON CLOTHING AND SHELTER

   Such were his opinions on food. He also thought it best to provide
   moderate covering for the body, not expensive and superfluous, for he said
   that one ought to use clothing and shoes in exactly the same way as
   armour, that is for the protection of the body and not for display.
   Therefore just as the most powerful weapons and those best calculated to
   protect the bearer are the best, and not those which attract the eye by
   their sheen, so likewise the garment or shoe which is most useful for the
   body is best, and not one which causes the foolish to turn and stare. For
   the covering should at once render the thing covered better and stronger
   than its natural condition, rather than weaker and worse. Those, then, who
   acquire smoothness and delicacy of skin by their clothing make their
   bodies worse, inasmuch as plainly the pampered and soft body is much worse
   than one that is sturdy and bears evidence of hard work. But those who
   strengthen and invigorate the body by the clothing they wear, those, I
   say, are the only ones who benefit the parts of the body so covered. It
   does not improve the appearance of the body to cover it completely with
   many garments, to smother it with tight wrappings, and to soften the hands
   and feet by close fitting gloves or shoes unless perhaps in case of
   illness. It is not good to be entirely without experience of cold and
   heat, but one ought in some degree to feel the cold in winter and likewise
   the heat of the

   .122


   123

   sun in summer and to seek the shelter of shade as little as possible.
   Wearing one chiton is preferable to needing two, and wearing none but only
   a cloak is preferable to wearing one. Also going barefoot is better than
   wearing sandals, if one can do it, for wearing sandals is next to being
   bound, but going barefoot gives the feet great freedom and grace when they
   are used to it. It is for this reason that one sees couriers wearing no
   sandals on the highways and the runners in a contest unable to make the
   best speed if they have to run in sandals.

   Since we make houses too for a shelter, I argue that they ought to be made
   to satisfy bare necessity, to keep out the cold and extreme heat and to be
   a protection from the sun and the winds for those who need it. In general,
   whatever a natural cave would offer, furnishing a moderate shelter for
   man, this our houses ought to furnish for us, with just enough to spare to
   make a convenient place for storing away man's food. What good are
   courtyards surrounded by colonnades? What good are all kinds of colored
   paints? What good are gold-decked rooms? What good are expensive stones,
   some fitted together on the floor, others inlaid in the walls, some
   brought from a great distance, and at the greatest expense? Are not all
   these things superfluous and unnecessary, without which it is possible not
   only to live but also to be healthy? Are they not the source of constant
   trouble, and do they not cost great sums of money from which many people
   might have benefited by public and private charity? How much more
   commendable than living a life of luxury it is to help many people. How
   much nobler than spending money for sticks and stones to spend it on men.
   How much more profitable than surrounding oneself with a great house to
   make many friends, the natural result of cheerfully doing good. What would
   one gain from a large and beautiful house comparable to what he would gain
   by conferring the benefits of his wealth upon the city and his
   fellow-citizens?


   125

   XX

   ON FURNISHINGS

   Related to and in harmony with extravagance in houses is all the matter of
   furnishings within the house—couches, tables, coverlets, drinking cups,
   and similar objects—completely surpassing all needs and going far beyond
   necessity. There are ivory and silver, yes, even golden couches, tables of
   similar materials, coverlets of purple and other colors difficult to
   obtain, cups made of gold and silver, some of marble or some similar
   material rivalling gold and silver in costliness. All these things are
   eagerly sought for, although a pallet furnishes us a place to lie on no
   worse than a silver or ivory couch, and a rough cloak is quite as suitable
   to cover it as a purple or crimson coverlet; it is possible for us to eat
   quite safely from a wooden table without longing for one of silver. Yes,
   and one can drink from earthenware cups which are quite as good for
   quenching the thirst as goblets of gold; and the wine which is poured into
   them is not tainted, but yields a fragrance sweeter than from cups of gold
   or silver. In general, one would rightly judge what is good and bad in
   furnishings by these three criteria: acquisition, use, and preservation.
   Whatever is difficult to obtain or not convenient to use or not easy to
   protect is to be judged inferior; but what we acquire with no difficulty
   and use with satisfaction and find easy to keep is superior. For this
   reason earthenware and iron and similar vessels are much better than those
   of silver or gold, because their acquisition is less trouble since they
   are cheaper, their usefulness is greater since we can safely expose them
   to heat and fire (which cannot be done with others) , and guarding them is
   less of a problem, for the inexpensive ones are less likely to be stolen
   than the expensive ones. No small part of preserving them too is keeping
   them clean, which is a more expensive matter with costly ones. Just as a
   horse which is bought for a small price but is able to fulfill many needs
   is more desirable than one which does little although he was bought for a
   great price, so in the matter of furnishings the cheaper and more
   serviceable are better than the more costly and less serviceable ones. Why
   is it, then, that the rare and expensive pieces are sought after rather
   than those which are available and cheap? It is because the things which
   are really good and fine are not recognized, and in place of them those
   which only seem good are eagerly sought by the foolish. As


   127

   madmen often think that black is white 3 so foolishness is next of kin to
   madness. Now we should find that the best lawgivers—■ and I think first of
   all of Lycurgus, who drove extravagance out of Sparta and substituted
   frugality, who preferred a life of deprivation as a means of producing
   courage to a life of excess, and who did away with luxury as a corrupting
   influence and considered the will to bear hardships the salvation of the
   state. Testimony to this is the endurance of the Spartan ephebes, who were
   made accustomed to bear hunger and thirst and cold, and even blows and
   other hardships. Trained in such noble and austere habits the ancient
   Lacedaemonians were the best of the Greeks and were so esteemed. Their
   very poverty they caused to be more envied than the King's wealth. For my
   part, then, I would choose sickness rather than luxury, for sickness harms
   only the body, but luxury destroys both body and soul, causing weakness
   and impotence in the body and lack of self-control and cowardice in the
   soul. Furthermore, luxury begets injustice because it also begets
   covetousness. For no man of extravagant tastes can avoid being lavish in
   expenditure, nor being lavish can he wish to spend little; but in his
   desire for many things he cannot refrain from acquiring them, nor again in
   his effort to acquire can he fail to be grasping and unjust; for no man
   would succeed in acquiring much by just methods. In still another way the
   man of luxurious habits would be unjust, for he would hesitate to
   undertake the necessary burdens for his city without abandoning his
   extravagant life, and if it seemed necessary to suffer deprivation on
   behalf of his friends or relatives he would not submit to it, for his love
   of luxury would not permit it. Nay more, there are times when duties to
   the gods must be undertaken by the man who would be just toward them, by
   performing sacrifices, initiatory rites, or some such other service. Here,
   too, the wastrel will be found wanting. Thus he would in all ways be
   unjust toward his city, toward his friends, and toward the gods, in
   failing to do what it is his duty to do. So, then, as being also the cause
   of injustice, luxury and extravagance must be shunned in every way.

   are mad {iravres ol /j.topol iialvovrai). Cf. Cicero Paradoxa IV and

   Tusc. Disp. Ill, 5, 10.

   4 Cf. Plutarch Lycurgus IX.

   13 The King of Persia was proverbially the richest man on earth.


   129

   XXI

   ON CUTTING THE HAIR

   He used to say that a man should cut the hair from the head for the same
   reason that we prune a vine, that is merely to remove what is useless.
   <But just as the eyebrows or eyelashes which perform a service in
   protecting the eyes should not be cut, so> neither should the beard be cut
   from the chin <for it is not superfluous), but it too has been provided
   for us by nature as a kind of cover or protection. Moreover, the beard is
   nature's symbol of the male just as is the crest of the cock and the mane
   of the lion; so one ought to remove the growth of hair that becomes
   burdensome, but nothing of the beard; for the beard is no burden so long
   as the body is healthy and not afflicted with any disease for which it is
   necessary to cut the hair from the chin. The remark of Zeno was well made
   that it is quite as natural to cut the hair as it is to let it grow long,
   in order not to be burdened by too much of it nor hampered for any
   activity. For nature plainly keeps a more careful guard against deficiency
   than against excess, in both plants and animals, since the removal of
   excess is much easier and simpler than the addition of what is lacking. In
   both cases man's common sense ought to assist nature, so as to make up the
   deficiencies as much as possible and fill them out, and to lessen and
   eliminate the superfluous. Therefore the hair should be cut only to get
   rid of too much of it and not for looks, as some think they must, who
   shave their cheeks and imitate the beardless or, would you believe it,
   boys who are just beginning to grow a beard, and the hair on the head they
   do not cut all in the same way, but differently in front and behind. In
   fact that which seems to them good-looking is quite the opposite and does
   not differ from the efforts of women to make themselves beautiful. For
   they, you know, plait some parts of their hair, some they let fall free,
   and some they arrange in some other way in order to appear more beautiful.
   So men who cut their hair are obviously doing it out of a desire to appear
   handsome to those whom they wish to please, and so some of their hair they
   cut off completely, some they arrange so as to be most pleasing to the
   women and boys by whom they want to be admired. Nowadays there are even
   men who cut their hair to free themselves of the weight of it and they
   also shave their cheeks. Clearly such men have become slaves of luxurious
   living and are completely enervated, men who can endure being seen as
   womanish creatures, hermaphrodites, something which real men would avoid
   at all costs. How could hair be a burden to men? Unless, of course, one
   should say that feathers are a burden to birds also.

